>> Ifill: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION RELEASED
CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS TODAY
OUTLINING THE NATIONAL SECURITY
AGENCY'S MASSIVE COLLECTION OF
DOMESTIC PHONE RECORDS.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT: THE
RELEASE COMES AMID REPORTS OF A
NEW N.S.A. SPYING PROGM ONRA
INTERNET ACTIVITY.
WE LOOK AT THE LATEST
REVELATIONS AND THE SECRET COURT
AT THE CENTER OF THE
CONTROVERSY.
>> Ifill: THENBEN , BERNANKE'S
TENURE AS FEDERAL RESERVE
CHAIRMAN NEARS ITS END, AS THE
DEBATE OVER WHO WILL REPLACE HIM
BEGINS.
WE EXAMINE HOW THAT CHOICE COULD
AFFECT THE ECONOMIC RECOVERY.
>> Brown: EGYPT'S GOVERNMENT
ORDERED POLICE TO TAKE ALL MEANS
NECESSARY TO DISBAND PROTESTS IN
SUPPORT OF THE OUSTED PRESIDENT.
MARGARET WARNER EXPLORES THE
POTENTIAL FOR VIOLENCE AND THE
ACTIONS OF THE NEW MILITARY
RULE.
>> Ifill: AND IN INDIA, CHILD
LABOR IS OUTLAWED, BUT A
STAGGERING NUMBER OF CHILDREN
STILL TOIL AWAY.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO REPORTS ON
EFFORTS TO CHANGE THAT PRACTICE.
>> THE COMBINATION OF OFFICIAL
AND MIDDLE-CLASS INDIFFERENCE,
AND DIRE POVERTY, DRIVES PERPSHA
50 MILLION CHILDREN INTO THE
WORKPLACE.
SOME AS YOUNG AS SIX OR SEVEN.
>> Ifill: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR."
>> Ifill: THE AMERICAN PUBLIC
LEARNED A LITTLE MORE TODAY
ABOUT THE SWEEPING SURVEILLANCE
OF TELEPHONE COMMUNICATIONS,
REVEALED BY EDWARD SNOWDEN.
THE GOVERNMENT RELEASED HEAVILY
REDACTED DOCUMENTS THATHOWE SD,
BROADLY, HOW THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY USES THE DATA.
AND, IN LONDON,  "THE GUARDIAN"
NEWSPAPER PUBLISHED IMAGES OF
WHAT ANALYSTS SEE, UNDER A
PROGRAM KNOWN AS "X-KEY-SCORE."
FOR MORE, WE TURN TO CHARLIE
SAVAGE, WHO'S COVERING THE STORY
FOR "THE NEW YORK TIMES."
CHARLIE SAVAGE, BECAUSE YOU'RE
COVERING THIS STORY, TELL ME
WHAT KNEW YOU SAW IN THESE
DOCUMENTS TODAY.
>> AS YOU SAID, THERE WERE TWO
SETS OF DOCUMENTS.
THERE WAS AN OFFICIALLY RELEASED
SET OF DOCUMENTS THAT THE
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY AND THE
OBAMA ADNISTMIRATION WANTED THE
PUBLIC TO SEE.
AND THOSE CONCERNED THIS PROGRAM
WHICH HAS BEEN COLLECTING FOR
YEARS EVER PHONE CALL DIED OR
RECEIVEED IN THE UNITED STATES.
AND THERE WAS AN UNOFFICIAL
RELEASE OF DOCUMENTS THEY DIDN'T
WANT ANYONE TO SEE AND THAT
CONCERNS THEIR VAST VACUUMING--
"THEY" BEING THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY-- VACUUMING UP
OF INTERNET ACTIVITY, APPARENTLY
PRIMARILY OF FOREIGNERS OVERSEAS
FROM SOME 150 DIFFERENT SITES
SCATTERED AROUND THE WORLD.
THAT WOULD BE BROWSE, HABITS,
SEARCH TERMS ON GOOGLE AND OTHER
SEARCH WEB SITES, WHAT'S BEING
SAID IN ENCRYPTED SEARCH
PROGRAMS.
>> IS THAT SOMETHING PERHAPS
FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS KNOW WE WERE
DOING?
>> FROM THE DOCUMENT WE CAN SEE
THE FIVE COUNTRIES IN THE SORT
OF ANGLOSPHERE-- CANADA,
BRITAIN, NEW ZEALAND, AUSTRALIA,
AND THE UNITED STATES-- MUST ALL
BE PARTICIPATING IN THIS
KNOWINGLY, BUT THE NUMBER OF
DOTS WHERE THERE ARE COLLECTION
SITE SERVERS SCATTER AROUND THE
WORLD, INCLUDING SOME COUNTRIES
NOT FRIENDLY TO THE UNITED
STATES, SUGGEST THERE ARE
COUNTRIES THAT DIDN'T KNOW THIS
WAS HAPPENING AND I SUSPECT WE
WILL SEE SOME REACTION AROUND
THE WORLD AS THIS STARTS TO GET
DIGESTED.
>> THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION HAS
SAID SINCE THE BEGINNING WE'RE
GATHERING METADATA BUT WE'RE NOT
ACTUALLY LISTENING IN ON PHONE
CALLS, WE'RE NOT ACTUALLY
GATHERING INFORMATION, UNLESS WE
HAVE SOME REASON.
WAS THERE ANYTHING IN EITHER OF
THESE TWO SETS OF DOCUMENTS
TODAY THAT WOULD UNDERCUT THAT
ARGUMENT?
>> AGAIN, YOU HAVE TO SEPARATE
THE TWO OF THEM, AND THAT ALSO
GOES TO THE STATEMENT THAT YOU
CITED THE ADMINISTRATION AS
SAYING.
WHEN IT COMES TO COLLECTING
METADATA, CALLING LOGS-- WHO
CALLED WHOM-- INSIDE THE UNITED
STATES, YES, BY DEFINITION THAT
DOESN'T INCLUDE CONTENT, WHAT
WAS SAID.
OF COURSE THEY DO WIRETAP ALL
THE TIME, JUST NOT THROUGH
THAT'S PROGRAM AND THERE ARE
EXTRA RULES IN COURT APPROVAL
FOR WIRETAPPING INSIDE THE
UNITED STATES.
THERE ARE ESSENTIALLY NO RULES
FOR SURVEILLANCE ABROAD.
THE U.S. CONSTITUTION DOES NOT
COVER NONCITIZENS NOT ON U.S.
SOIL.
THE DOMESTIC WIRETAPPING LAWS
ARE WRITTEN TO EXCLUDE THAT KIND
OF FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE
COLLECTION ACTIVITY.
IT'S KIND OF OPEN SEASON.
WHATEVER A COUNTRY CAN GET AWAY
WITH, IT DOES, IN THE ESPIONAGE
WORLD DISPP WHAT WE'VE SEEN IN
THE LAST FEW WEEKS WITH ALL
THESE LEAKS FROM EDWARD SNOWDEN
FROM THE N.S.A. IS THE UNITED
STATES REALLY CAN DO QUITE A
LOT, MORE EVEN THAN WAS LONG
SUSPECTED ABOUT THEIR CAPACITY
TO JUST VAMUME UP FRONTA PROCESD
SPY ON WHAT THE WORLD IS DOING
ON ITS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
NETWORKS.
>> THE DOMESTIC DOCUMENTS
DECLASSIFIED CONFIRMED SOME OF
THE THINGS THE EDWARD SNOWDEN
LEAKS TOLD US ABOUT MAJOR PHONE
COMPANIES LIKE VERIZON TURNING
OVER DOCUMENTS TO THE
GOVERNMENT.
DO WE HAVE ANY IDEA HOW WIDELY
THAT-- HOW MUCH INFORMATION WAS
GATHERED AND WHAT USE THE
GOVERNMENT MAKES OF IT?
>> WELL, SO, THIS IS THE KEY
QUESTION THAT SENATORS WILL
TODAY AT THE SENATOR JUDICIARY
COMMITTEE HEARING AND LAWMAKERS
GENERALLY HAVE BEEN ASKING ABOUT
THIS DOMESTIC PHONE LOG
COLLECTION PROGRAM INVOLVING
AMERICANS' COMMUNICATIONS, WHICH
IS WE CAN SEE HOW ON PAPER IT'S
USEFUL.
YOU ALREADY HAVE THE DATA.
IT'S ALL IN ONE BIG SET.
IF YOU WANT TO GO LOOK AND SEE
YOU KNOW THIS PERSON IS A
SUSPECT, WHO HAVE THEY BEEN IN
CONTACT WITH?
WHO HAVE THOSE PEOPLE IN TURN
BEEN IN CONTACT WITH.
YOU CAN VERY QUICKLY DO THAT IF
YOU'VE ALREADY COLLECTED THE
DATA OF EVERYBODY.
IF YOU HAVE THE HEYDEMANN STACK,
YOU CAN GO SEARCHING FOR THE
NEEDLES.
THE QUESTION THEY KEEP ASKING IS
HAS THIS ACTUALLY THWARTED ANY
PLOT?
WE KNOW THE COLLECTION OVERSEAS
APPEARS TO HAVE BEEN QUITE
USEFUL.
THIS DATA LEAKED TODAY SUGGESTED
300 TERRORISTS ASES OF 2008 HAVE
BEEN IDENTIFIED FROM THIS
OVERSEAS COLLECTION, BUT WHAT
ABOUT THE DOMESTIC COLLECTION
THAT HAS THIS IMPLICATION FOR
AMERICANS' PRIVACY RIGHTS.
AND THE INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY
HAS REALLY STRUGGLED TO COME UP
WITH COMPELLING EXAMPLES OF HOW
THIS IS NOT MERELY A
THEORETICALLY USEFUL TOOL BUT
ONCE THAT STOPPED SOMETHING FROM
HAPPENING THAT OTHERWISE WOULD
HAVE HAPPENED.
>> ARE THEY PERSUADING ANYBODY
IN THE HOUSE OR SENATE THAT THAT
IS WHAT WE SAW LAST WEEK, THAT
THE HOUSE VOTE CAME VERY CLOSE
TO OUTLAWING THIS KIND OF
ACTIVITY.
THERE WAS STILL MORE SKEPTICISM
TODAY?
CERTAINLY I THINK MOST NOTABLY
TODAY THE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
HEARING, THE DEMOCRATIC CHAIRMAN
OF THAT COMMITTEE I COMMIT A VEL
MEMBER OF THE SENATE-- PATRICK
LEAHY-- SAID HE HAD BEEN LOOKING
AT A LIST OF TERRORIST EVENTS
DISRUPTED BY VARIOUS
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS AND HE SAW
VERY LITTLE ON IT THAT SUGGESTED
THERE WAS UTILITY TO THIS
AMERICAN PHONE LOG PROGRAM.
HE SAID IF IT DOESN'T SEEM TO BE
EFFECTIVE IT SHOULD BE SHUT
DOWN, AND SOINAR HE'S NOT
PERSUADED.
DESPITE FACT THAT MEMBERS OF THE
INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE-- AT
LEAST LEADERES OF THEM WHO KNEW
ABOUT THIS ALL ALONG-- HAVE BEEN
TRYING TO DEFEND IT AND THE
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY IN THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION-- A LOT OF
WHICH ARE CAREER OFFICIALS WHO
SPAN ADMINISTRATIONS-- HAVING
TRYING TO DEFEND IT.
WE SEE SKEPTICISM, BIPARTISAN
SKEPTICISM IN BOTH CHAMBERS OF
CONGRESS.
>> SOUNDS LIKE MORE SHOES YET TO
DROP.
CHARLIE SAVAGE OF THE "NEW YORK
TIMES," THANKS FOR KEEPING TRACK
FOR US.
>>HANK T YOU.
>> Brown: STILL TO COME ON THE
"NEWSHOUR": THE SECRET COURT AT
THE CENTER OF GOVERNMENT
SURVEILLANCE; WHY THE HEAD OF
THE FEDERAL RESERVE MATTERS; THE
POTENTIAL FOR FURTHER UNREST IN
EGYPT AND CHILD LABOR IN INDIA.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Holman: THE FEDERAL RESERVE
DOWNGRADED ITS ASSESSMENT OF THE
ECONOMY TODAY.
THE CENTRAL BANK REPORTED ONLY
MODEST GROWTH-- SLIGHTLY WORSE
THAN E MOTHDERATE READING IT
GAVE IN JUNE.
THAT SUGGESTED THERE'S NO EARLY
END IN SIGHT TO THE FED'S
ECONOMIC STIMULUS EFFORTS.
THE REACTION ON WALL STREET WAS
MIXED.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 21 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
15,499.
THE NASDAQ ROSE NEARLY TEN
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 3,626.
THE U.S. HOUSE HAS GIVEN FINAL
APPROVAL TO A STUDENT LOAN DEAL,
JUST IN TIME FOR THE FALL
SEMESTER.
THE BIPARTISAN AGREEMENT ALREADY
PASSED THE SENATE.
IT WILL TIE INTEREST RATES TO
THE PERFORMANCE OF THE FINANCIAL
MARKETS.
THAT MEANS UNDERGRADUATES WHO
TAKE OUT THEIR OWN LOANS WILL
PAY 3.9% THIS FALL.
THE INTEREST RATES WOULD RISE
OVER TIME AS THE ECONOMY
IMPROVES.
PRESIDENT OBAMA PAID A RARE CALL
ON CONGRESS TODAY.
HE TALKED UP HIS ECONOMIC IDEAS
TO FELLOW DEMOCRATS AND TRIED TO
CALM CONCERNS ABOUT HIS HEALTH
CARE LAW.
>> HELLO, EVERYBODY!
>> Holman: THE PRESIDENT ARRIVED
FIRST ON THE HOUSE SIDE OF THE
CAPITOL, AND LATER AFTER A
CLOSED-DOOR SESSION THAT LASTED
NEARLY AN HOUR, HE SAID HIS
MESSAGE WAS SIMPLE.
>> JOBS, MIDDLE CLASS, GROWTH.
>> Holman: HOUSE MINORITY LEADER
NANCY PELOSI SAID HER MEMBERS
WERE ENTHUSIASTIC.
>> IT WAS A REALLY MASTERFUL
PRESENTATION THAT HE MADE ON THE
SUBJECT OF JOBS IN THE FUTURE.
AND TODAY, WE HAD THE CHANCE TO
GO BACK AND FORTH ON SOME OF THE
ISSUES THAT, SO HE COULD HEAR
SOME OF OUR PRIORITIES, AND WE
HIS.
>> Holman: OTHER
DEMOCRATS SAID THOSE ISSUES
INCLUDED THE PUBLIC'S CONFUSION
OVER THE NEW HEALTH CARE LAW AND
FEARS THE PROSPECTS FOR
IMMIGRATION REFORM LEGISLATION
MAY BE DIMMING.
LATER, MR. OBAMA CROSSED THE
CAPITOL, FOR A SIMILAR MEETING
WITH SENATE DEMOCRATS.
MAINE INDEPENDENT ANGUS KING--
WHO CAUCUSES WITH THE DEMOCRATS-
- SAID ON HEALTH CARE, THE
PRESIDENT URGED THEM
TO REMIND PEOPLE THAT A LOT OF
GOOD THINGS ARE HAPPENING.
CONGRESS ALSO FACES A SEPTEMBER
30 DEADLINE TO APPROVE NEW
SPENDING BILLS, OR RISK A
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN.
WASHINGTON STATE'S PATTY MURRAY
SAID THE PRESIDENT ALSO WARNED
REPUBLICANS MUST KEEP BUDGET
ISSUES SEPARATE FROM THE LOOMING
DEBT LIMIT LEGISLATION.
>> HE MADE IT VERY CLEAR THAT HE
WAS NOT GOING TO NEGOTIATE OVER
THE DEBT CEILING-- WE HAVE GOT
TO STOP LURCHING FROM CRISIS TO
CRISIS, IN HIS WORDS AND IN OUR
WORDS-- AND THAT WE ARE GOING TO
>> Holman: LAWMAKERS NOW ARE
MAKING READY TO LEAVE FOR THEIR
FIVE-WEEK SUMMER RECESS.
FOR HIS PART, MR. OBAMA WILL
CONTINUE HIS PUSH ON ECONOMIC
POLICY, NEXT TUESDAY, WITH A
SPEECH ON HOMEOWNERSHIP IN
PHOENIX.
LATER, HOUSE REPUBLICAN LEADERS
WITHDREW A BILL THAT WOULD MAKE
SWEEPING CUTS IN TRANSPORTATION,
HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT FUNDING FOR THE
COMING FISCAL YEAR.
CONSERVATIVES HAD PUSHED THE
MEASURE TO MEET LOWER SPENDING
LEVELS SPELLED OUT IN THE HOUSE
REPUBLICANS' BUDGET OUTLINE.
SHOOTINGS AND BOMBINGS ACROSS
THE COUNTRY HAS KILLED AT LEAST
26 PEOPLE.
SEVERAL BLASTS TARGETED SHI-ITE
AND SUNNI MOSQUES OVERNIGHT IN
BAGHDAD.
THAT FOLLOWED BOMBINGS ON MONDAY
THAT KILLED 58 IRAQIS.
MORE THAN 700 PEOPLE HAVE DIED
IN THE VIOLENCE THIS MONTH.
CIVILIAN CASUALTIES IN
AFGHANISTAN HAVE RISEN SHARPLY
THIS YEAR.
THE UNITED NATIONS REPORTED
TODAY THEY WERE UP 23% IN THE
FIRST SIX MONTHS OF THE YEAR.
FROM JANUARY TO JUNE, THE U.N.
COUNTED 1,319 CIVILIAN DEATHS
AND MORE THAN 2,500 WOUNDED.
IT BLAMED TALIBAN INSURGENTS FOR
74% OF THE CASUALTIES.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
ARRIVED IN PAKISTAN THIS
EVENING, FOR AN UNANNOUNCED
VISIT.
HE'S TO MEET WITH NEWLY ELECTED
PRIME MINISTER NAWAZ SHARIF.
THE VISIT CAME AS PAKISTANI
LICEPO SAID THEY'VE RECAPTURED
MORE THAN 40 INMATES WHO ESCAPED
FROM A PRISON MONDAY NIGHT.
TALIBAN ATTACKERS HAD FREED SOME
250 PRISONERS IN ALL.
THE 35 GUARDS ON DUTY AT THE
SITE WERE OVERWHELMED BY 150
ATTACKERS WHO CARRIED GUNS,
BOMBS AND GRENADES.
REPORTS SAID ONLY TEN OF THE
GUARDS WERE ARMED.
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE IN ZIMBABWE
HEADED TO THE POLLS TODAY TO
ELECT A PRESIDENT, AND POSSIBLY,
END AN ERA.
INCUMBENT PRESIDENT ROBERT
MUGABE WAS TRYING TO KEEP HIS
33-YEAR GRIP ON POWER IN THE
AFRICAN NATION.
WE HAVE A REPORT FROM NEIL
CONNERY OF "INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS."
>> Reporter: FIRST LIGHT-- BUT
IN THE CHILL OF DAWN, THERE IS
HOPE IN THE AIR.
THE POLLS HAVE JUST OPENED, AND
ALREADY THE QUEUES STRETCH OUT,
SUCH IS THE HUNG TORE MAKE THEIR
VOICE HEARD, AS ZIMBABWE VOTES.
OPPOSITION CANDIDATE IAN
McCONEY ARRIVES TO CAST HIS
BALLOT.
HE BELIEVES THIS COULD BE THE
MOST SIGNIFICANT DAY FOR THIS
COUNTRY SINCE INDEPENDENCE.
>> 1980 WAS A WATERSHED ELECTION
FROM COLONIAL DAYS, AND THIS IS
A WATERSHED ELECTION FOR
FREEDOM.
>> Reporter: BUT AS ZIMBABWE'S
ONLY PRESIDENT SINCE
INDEPENDENCE 33 YEARS AGO VOTED,
HE SAID THE PEOPLE HAD A CHOICE
TO MAKE AND HE PROMISED HE'LL GO
IF HE LOSES.
THE MAN CHALLENGING HIM, IS
CONFIDENT HE HAS THE SUPPORT
NEEDED TO WIN.
>> WELL, I THOUGHT THAT.
>> Reporter: BUT WITH THE
VOTERS REGISTERED ONLY ISSUED
YESTERDAY, AND WIDESPREAD
ALLEGATIONS OF VOTE RIGGING,
CRITICS DOUBT THIS CAN BE JUDGED
A FREE AND FAIR ELECTION BUT
DESPITE THOSE FEARS, ACROSS
ZIMBABWE, WHEREVER WE TRAVELED,
THE DETERMINATION TO VOTE WAS
CLEAR.
THE LARGE TURNOUT IN THIS
ELECTION COULD PROVE
THE OPPOSITION FEAR THIS BOOL ON
THE IS GOING TO BE FIXED.
BUT THEY SAY THAT THEIR ABILITY
TO COUNTER THAT INCREASES WITH
THE NUMBER OF VOTERS WHO TURN
OUT.
AS ZIMBABWEANS CONSIDER THIS
COUNTRY'S FUTURE, THEY HOPE
THEIR VOTE WILL COUNT.
>> I'M HAPPY BECAUSE WE HAVE
DONE EVEINS MOVING SO
SMOOTHLY.
>> I FEEL HAPPY TO VOTE TODAY.
WE CHOOSE A PRESIDENT.
>> Reporter: BUT WILL THAT
CHOICE BE RESPECTED?
IF NOT, THEN THE CONSEQUENCES
FOR THIS NATION COULD BE
DEVASTATING.
>> Holman: ZIMBABWE WAS ROCKED
BY VIOLENCE IN 2008, AMID
CHARGES MUGABE HAD STOLEN THAT
ELECTION.
HE AND TSVANGIRAI EVENTUALLY
AGREED TO SHARE POWER IN A UNITY
GOVERNMENT.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JEFF.
>> Brown: AS NEW REVELATIONS OF
DATA GATHERING CONTINUE TO COME
OUT, THE ROLE OF THE FOREIGN
INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE, OR
FISA, COURT HAS COME UNDER
INCREASING SCRUTINY.
WE TAKE A CLOSER LOOK NOW.
THE STORY OF THE COURT GOES BACK
THE SENATE'S CHURCH COMMITTEE
AMONG OTHERS HAD CHRONICLED
SURVEILLANCE ABUSES BY THE
GOVERNMENT BROUGHT TO LIGHT IN
THE WATERGATE SCANDAL.
ONE RESPONSE: CONGRESS CREATED
THE COURT TO REVIEW WARRANTS FOR
NATIONAL SECURITY
INVESTIGATIONS.
PROCEEDINGS ARE CLOSED AND
MANY YEARS AND SEVERAL
AMENDMENTS LATER, THE SNOWDEN
DISCLOSURES OF SURVEILLANCE BY
THE N.S.A. HAVE RAISED NEW
QUESTIONS.
ON SUNDAY, FOR EXAMPLE, THE
SENATE'S DEMOCRATIC MAJORITY
WHIP-- DICK DURBIN-- ARGUED THE
COURT IS HARDLY IMPARTIAL.
>> AND THERE SHOULD BE ANOTHER
IN THIS CASE, IT'S FIXED IN A
WAY, IT'S LOADED.
THERE'S ONLY ONE CASE COMING
BEFORE THE FISA, THE
GOVERNMENT'S CASE.
LET'S HAVE AN ADVOCATE FOR
SOMEONE STANDING UP FOR CIVIL
LIBERTIES TO SPEAK UP ABOUT THE
PRIVACY OF AMERICANS WHEN THEY
MAKE EACH OF THESE DECISIONS.
>> Brown: BUT AT TODAY'S SENATE
HEARING, DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL
JAMES COLE SAID THERE'S NO CLEAR
PRECEDENT FOR CHANGING THE WAY
WARRANTS ARE APPROVED.
>> TRADITIONALLY, WHEN YOU ISSUE
SEARCH WARRANTS, WHEN YOU ISSUE
WIRE TAPS AND THINGS LIKE THAT,
IN THE CRIMINAL LAW YOU DON'T
HAVE AN ADVERSARY PROCESS THAT
TAKES PLACE IF THERE ISN'T
SOMEBODY ON THE OTHER SIDE.
SO THERE'S A LEGAL TRADITION
THAT THE WAY WE'VE BEEN DOING IT
IS CERTAINLY ONE THAT WE'VE DONE
IN OTHER CONTEXTS.
>> Brown: ANOTHER ISSUE: THE
FISA COURT'S 11 JUDGES ARE
CHOSEN BY THE CHIEF JUSTICE OF
THE U.S. SUPREME COURT AND
ALL OF THE CURRENT MEMBERS HAVE
BEEN SELECTED BY CHIEF JUSTICE
JOHN ROBERTS.
REPUBLICAN SENATOR JEFF FLAKE OF
ARIZONA RAISED THAT ISSUE AT
TODAY'S HEARING.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THERE'S BEEN SOME CRITICISM THAT
THE PROCESS THAT WE HAVE FOR THE
SELECTION OF THESE JUDGES MAY
LEAD TO MORE REPUBLICAN JUDGES
BEING APPOINTED THAN DEMOCRATIC
OR REPUBLICANS APPOINTING JUDGES
THAN DEMOCRATS APPOINTING
JUDGES.
DO YOU SENSE OR SEE ANY
DIFFERENCE IN YOUR EXPERIENCE,
ALL OF YOU, WITH-- IS THAT AN
ISSUE THAT SOMEBODY OUGHT TO BE
CONCERNED ABOUT, OR HAVE YOU
SEEN ANY DIFFERENCE IN DECISIONS
RENDERED?
>> FROM MY EXPERIENCE, I HAVEN'T
SEEN ANY DECISIONS OF THE
JUDGES-- OUR JUDGES AND THEY'RE
BEING GUIDED BY THE LAW AND NOT
NECESSARILY BY POLITICS, BUT
THAT'S CERTAINLY A TOPIC WE
WOULD LEAVE TO THE SOUND
DISCRETION OF THE CONGRESS.
>> Brown: ALREADY, THERE ARE
PROPOSALS IN CONGRESS BRING
RAISED TO CHANGE THE WAY THE
COURT OPERATES, AND HOW ITS
MEMBERS ARE NAMED.
WE RAISE THESE QUESTIONS AND
MORE NOW, WITH JAMES BAMFORD, A
JOURNALIST, LAWYER AND AUTHOR OF
SEVERAL BOOKS ON THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY.
AND STEVEN BRADBURY, HEAD OF THE
OFFICE OF LEGAL COUNSEL IN THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT DURING THE
GEORGE W. BUSH ADMINISTRATION.
WELCOME TO BOTH OF YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> JAMES BAMFORD, WE HEARD
EARLIER THIS GWEN'S DISCUSSION
ABOUT NEW REVELATIONS WHAT, DO
YOU THINK OF THOSE AND WHAT DO
THEY TELL US ABOUT THIS ROLE OF
THE FISA COURT?
>> THESE NEW REVELATIONS ARE
REALLY AN EXPANSIVE LOOK AT A
MUCH MORE EXPANSIVE
EAVESDROPPING CAPABILITY.
WE LOOKED BEFORE AT THE
TELEPHONE AND THE E-MAIL.
NOW, THIS IS PRETTY MUCH THE
INTERNET.
AND IT'S VERY WORRISOME IN THE
SENSE THAT PEOPLE WHEN THEY
COMMUNICATE ON THE INTERNET ARE
COMMUNICATING BASICALLY THEIR
THOUGHTS, THEIR DEEPEST THOUGHTS
IN THEIR MINDS A LOT OF TIMES.
THEIR THOUGHTS SOMETIMES THAT
THEY DON'T WANT TO SHARE WITH
ANYBODY ELSE.
IF YOU HAVE THIS MEGACOLLECTION
THAT'S GOING OAGAIN, IT RAISES
WILL THE QUESTION OF WHAT
OVERSIGHT IS THERE AND WHAT
CHECKS AND BALANCES ARE THERE?
WE DIDN'T SEE THERE WERE VERY
MANY CHECKS AND BALANCES ON THE
OTHER SYSTEMS.
AND MAYBE THE SAME THING APPLIES
HERE.
>> Brown: WE'LL WALK THROUGH
SOME OF THOSE ISSUES, BUT FIRST,
GENERALLY, WHAT'S YOUR THOUGHT
STEVEN GREENHOUSE.
>> I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
FOCUS ON WHAT THE GOVERNMTEN
DECLASSIFIED AND DITS DIS CLOSED
ABOUT THE FISA PROCESS.
TWO THINGS I TAKE FROM THAT--
ONE, IT SHOWS THERE WAS A LOT OF
DETAIL PROVIDED TO CONGRESS IN
2009 AND 2011, ABOUT THE
TELEPHONE METADATA COLLECTION,
GREAT DETAIL DESCRIBING THE
COLLECTION, THE SCOPE, HOW IT
WAS USED, THE LIMITATION.
>> Brown: WE'RE SAYING IT
WASN'T JUST LEFT TO THE COURT.
CONGRESS HAD A SAYS WELL.
>> THAT'S CORRECT.
AND THE DOCUMENTS SHOW THAT
EVERY MEMBER OF CONGRESS WAS
INVITED WAS TO REVIEW THOSE
DESCRIPTIONS IN CONGRESS AND SO
HAD THE OPPORTUNITY TO
UNDERSTAND THE FULL SCOPE.
THEY ALSO DISCLOSED THE FISA
COURT ORDER, THE PRIMARY ORDER
FOR THE TELEPHONE METADATA
COLLECTION.
AND I THINK IT VERY CLEARLY
SHOWS THE DEGREE OF OVERSIGHT,
ALL OF THE PROTECTIONS AND THE
LIMITATIONS.
GOES INTO GREAT DETAIL, VERY
CONSISTENT WITH WHAT THE
GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN DESCRIBING
IN ITS HEARINGS ON THE HILL.
>> Brown: BUT YOU SEE THAT AND
YOU SEE NOT ENOUGH OVERSIGHT.
>> WELL, I--
>> Brown: SOME PEOPLE HAVE
USED THIS "RUBBER STAMP" TERM.
>> I READ THE DOCUMENTS THAT THE
GOVERNMENT RELEASED TODAY ON T
THE-- WHERE THEY SAY THEY
BRIEFED EVERY MEMBER OF CONGRESS
ON THIS PROGRAM, BUT I SAW
NOWHERE IN THOSE DOCUMENT
WHERE'S IT DESCRIBED THE FULL
EXTENT OF IT.
IT SAID THIS IS A VERY BIG
PROGRAM, BUT IT DIDN'T ANYWHERE
SAY THAT WE'RE TARGETING EVERY
SINGLE PERSON IN THE UNITED
STATES, 300 MILLION PEOPLE.
SO THAT'S WHY YOU HAVE THIS
REACTION FROM PEOPLE IN CONGRESS
WHO ARE SAYING, "WE HAD NO IDEA
IT WAS THIS BIG, THAT IT WAS
EVERY SINGLE PERSON, EVERY
SINGLE DAY, EVERY SINGLE
TELEPHONE CALL THE METADATA FROM
IT.
>> Brown: WHAT'S THE CHIEF
PROBLEM YOU HAVE WITH THE FISA
COURT ITSELF?
AS WE SAID, IT WAS SET UP IN
1978 UNDER SOME PREVIOUS TIMES
OF CONCERN, RIGHT?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
IT WAS WORKING VERY FINE UP
UNTIL THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION.
AND THAT'S WHEN THE MUST HAVE BH
ADMINISTRATION DECIDED TO
VIOLATE THE LAW AND GO AROUND
THE FISA COURT.
>> Brown: HOW?
>> WELL, THEY DECIDED THAT THEY
DIDN'T TRUST THE COURT TO-- THEY
FELT THE COURT WAS GOING TO
PROBABLY DISAPPROVE THEIR PLAN
FOR THIS WARRANTLESS
EAVESDROPPING PROGRAM SO THEY
DECIDED TO VIOLATE THE FOREIGN
INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT
AND GO AROUND THE COURT AND DO
THE WARRANTLESS EAVESDROPPING
WITHOUT EVER INFORMING THE
COURT-- ALTHOUGH, THEY TOLD THE
CHIEF JUSTICE-- THE PRESIDING
JUDGE IN THE COURT, BUT NOT--
ASKED THE JUDGE NOT TO TELL THE
OTHER JUDGES.
SO YOU HAVE THIS-- AFTER 9/11,
YOU HAVE THIS EFFORT BY THE
ADMINISTRATION NOT ONLY TO
BYPASS THE COURT BUT TO WEAKEN
THE COURT AFTER THESE
REVELATIONS WERE DISCOVERED.
SO THAT WAS WHAT HAPPENED IN THE
FISA AMENDMENTS ACT WHERE THEY
ACTUALLY WEAKENED THE COURT.
AND I THINK THAT'S WHAT'S
CHANGED A LOT OF THE DYNAMICS IN
THE COURT SINCE THEN.
>> Brown: I KNOW YOU SEE AN
ALTERNATIVE HISTORY HERE.
>> I DO.
I THINK THIS IS A GREAT STORY IN
TERMS OF HISTO FORRY THE UNITED
STATES BECAUSE I THINK WE FACED
THE CHALLENGES OF 9/11.
THERE WERE LIMITATIONS SEEN IN
THE SYSTEM.
IT WASN'T WORKABLE FOR WHAT
NEEDED TO BE DONE TO PROTECT THE
COUNTRY.
AND CONGRESS AND THE PRESIDENT
OVER THE YEARS SINCE HAVE COME
TOGETHER AND WE HAVE NEW
STATUTES, AMENDMENTS TOIFIES
ATHAT HAVE MADE THE PROCESS MORE
EFFECTIVE, MORE STREAMLINED, AND
I THINK THAT'S BEEN A VERY GOOD
STORY.
>> Brown: IF THE FISA COURT
HAS APPROVED-- IT SOUNDS LIKE
MOST EVERYTHING THAT'S BEEN
BROUGHT TO IT-- DOES THAT
SUGGEST THAT IT IS DOING ENOUGH
TO LOOK AT ALL THE DATA, LOOK AT
THE QUESTIONS, RAISE THE ISSUES,
THE CONCERNS THAT PEOPLE HAVE
ABOUT PRIVACY?
>> WELL, IN FACT, IN MY
EXPERIENCE, THE FISA COURT AND
THE LEGAL ADVISERS WHO ARE
PERMANENT STAFF TO THE COURT ASK
A LOT OF HARD QUESTIONS UP
FRONT.
IN OTHER WORDS, THEY GET
READ-AHEAD COPIES OF THE
APPLICATIONS.
THERE'S A LOT OF BACK-AND-FORTH,
A LOT OF TESTING, A LOT OF
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION PROVIDED.
SO THERE'S A GOOD UNDERSTANDING
OF THE LEGAL BASIS AND FACTUAL
BASIS FOR APPLICATIONS WHEN
THEY'RE ACTUALLY SIGNED AND
SUBMITTED SO THAT THE COURT
PROCESS CAN MOVE UNDER
EFFICIENTLY AND QUICKLY.
>> Brown: WHAT DO YOU THINK OF
THAT?
WHAT DO YOU THINK NEEDS TO BE
DONE?
WHAT WOULD YOU LIKE TO SEE DONE
TO STRENGTHEN THE COURT?
>> THERE ARE A COUPLE OF THINGS,
FIRST OF ALL, THE COURT IS
PACKED, AS SOMEBODY JUST SAID
EARLIER.
YOU'VE GOT 11 JUDGES-- YOU HAVE
10 OUT OF 11 JUDGES THAT ARE
APPOINTED BY A CHIEF JUDGE WHO
REALLY APPOINTS THEM AS PART OF
HIS OWN PARTY.
THEY'RE ALL REPUBLICAN APPOINT
EASE, PRETTY MUCH, CONSERVATIVE
PEOPLE.
SO YOU'VE GOT THEM VERY MUCH
PACKED IN ONE IDEOLOGICAL
VIEWPOINT.
AND SECOND OF ALL, IT'S ALL EX
PARTE.
IN OTHER WORDS, THERE'S ONLY ONE
SIDE THAT ARGUE ARGUES IN FRONT,
AND THAT'S THE GOVERNMENT.
SO THERE ARE DIFFERENT WAYS TO
GET AROUND THAT IS YOU CAN
APPOINT A SORT OF PROFESSIONAL
ADVOCATE WHO IS FULLY CLEARED
AND COULD ARGUE BOTH SIDES.
THIS ISN'T A NORMAL WIRETAPPING
CAIRS CASEWHERE WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT ONE CRIMINAL DEFENDANT IN
RAY BANK ROBBERY OR SOMETHING.
THIS IS WHERE YOU'R YOU'RE TALKG
ABOUT 300 MILLION PEOPLE HAVING
THEIR RECORDS TAKEN.
THERE'S NO COMPARISON.
AND YOU CAN ALSO HAVE THE JUDGES
APPOINTED BY THE FEDERAL APPEALS
COURT JUDGES.
>> Brown: IS THIS AN AREA
WHERE WE COULD GET ANY
AGREEMENT, THAT THERE ARE SOME
REFORMS POSSIBLE?
>> I DON'T THINK REFORMS ARE
NEEDED IN THE SYSTEM.
BUT,BVIO OUSLY, CONGRESS WILL
LOOK AT OPTIONS.
I DON'T BELIEVE THE CHIEF
JUSTICE HAS MADE ANY
APPOINTMENTS BASED ON PARTISAN
POLITICS.
WE HAVE A TRADITION IN THIS
COUNTRY, WHEN A FEDERAL JUDGE
HAS BEEN CONFIRMED TO THE BENCH
FOR LIFETIME APPOINTMENT, THE
JUDGE IS NOT A POLITICAL PERSON
AT THAT POINT, AND INDEPENDENT
JUDGMENT IS BROUGHT TO BEAR.
AND I THINK THAT'S-- I THINK THE
CHIEF JUSTICE WORKS WITH THE
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE
JUDICIARY ON THESE APPOINTMENTS,
AND IT'S A QUESTION OF WHICH
JUDGES ARE INTERESTED IN SERVING
AND HAVE THE TIME TO SERVE.
THERE'S A LOT OF QUESTIONS THAT
GO INTO THAT, AND I HAVE FAITH
THAT THE CHIEF JUSTICE HAS DONE
A GOOD JOB.
IN TERMS OF THE ADVOCATE,
DIFFICULT PRACTICAL ISSUES
THERE.
YOU CAN'T CREATE A NEW OFFICE
THAT'S NOT IN THE EXECUTIVE
BRANCH OR NOT WORKING UNDER THE
COURT.
SO IT'S GOING TO BE IN THE
SYSTEM IF YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE A
SPECIAL ADVOCATE LIKE THAT.
AND I'M NOT SURE IT WOULD REALLY
ACHIEVE WHAT THE ADVOCATES OF
THAT FAVOR.
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT, WELL I
KNOW THAT AND OTHER RELIGION ON
THE TABLE NOW IN CONGRESS.
FOR NOW WE'LL LEAVE IT THERE,
JAMES BAMFORD, STEVE BRADBURY,
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU, JEFF.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: NOW, WHY IT MATTERS
WHO RUNS THE FEDERAL RESERVE.
JUDY WOODRUFF HAS THAT.
>> Woodruff: FEDERAL RESERVE
BOARD CHAIRMAN BEN BERNANKE WILL
STEP DOWN AT THE END OF HIS TERM
NEXT JANUARY, BUT THE DISCUSSION
OF WHO PRESIDENT OBAMA MIGHT TAP
TO REPLACE HIM IS ALREADY WELL
UNDERWAY.
TO UPDATE US, WE TURN TO LONG-
TIME FED-WATCHER AND "WALL
STREET JOURNAL" ECONOMICS EDITOR
DAVID WESSEL.
HE IS ALSO AUTHOR OF "IN FED WE
TRUST: BEN BERNANKE'S WAR ON THE
GREAT PANIC."
DAVID WESSEL, WELCOME BACK TO
THE "NEWSHOUR."
>> GOOD TO BE WITH YOU, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: BEFORE WE TALK
ABOUT CHOOSING THE NEXT FED
CHAIRMAN, LET ME ASK YOU ABOUT
TODAY'S STATEMENT FROM THE FED,
ABOUT THE ECONOMY, THE STORY
KWAME REPORT AID FEW MINUTE AGO.
HOW DID YOU READ THAT?
>> I READ IT AS THE FED WAS
GOING OUT OF ITS WAY TO SAY
NOTHING.
THEY CRAFTED A STATEMENT THAT
REFLECTED SOME DEVELOPMENTS IN
THE ECONOMY BUT THEY SENT NO NEW
SIGNAL ABOUT THEIR PLANS FOR
WINDING DOWN BOND BUYING OR
CHANGING INTEREST RATES.
IT WAS A NO-NEWS EVENT.
>> Woodruff: LET'S TALK ABOUT
THE POSITION OF BEING THE
CHAIRMAN OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE.
HOW IMPORTANT A JOB IS THIS, NOT
JUST MONETARY POLICY BUT
ECONOMIC POLICY?
>> I THINK IT'S PRETTY
IMPORTANT.
WE'VE SEEN IN THE LAST COUPLE OF
YEARS HOW IMPORTANT BEN BERNANKE
WAS IN HELPING TO MANAGE THE
WORLD ECONOMY DURING THIS
DEVASTATING FINANCIAL CRISIS.
WE KNOW FROM HISTORY THAT PAUL
VOLCKER, ALAN GREENSPAN, BEN
BERNANKE, THE CHAIRMAN, EVEN
THOUGH HE'S ONE OF 19 PEOPLE ON
THE COMMITTEE, HAS ENORMOUS
AMOUNT OF SWAY, BECOMES A SYMBOL
OF CONFIDENCE IN THE GOVERNMENT,
AND IT'S MORE IMPORTANT NOW THAN
EVER BECAUSE THE DODD-FRANK LAW
GAVE THE FED A WHOLE LOT MORE
POWER AND OVERSIGHT OVER THE
FINANCIAL SYSTEM, AND THAT WILL
ALSO BE THE RESPONSIBILITY OF
THE NEXT FED CHAIRMAN.
>> Woodruff: SO THE NAMES
WE'RE HEARING THE MOST,
SUPPOSEDLY THE FRONT-RUNNERS ARE
THE CURRENT VICE CHAIRMAN MAN OF
THE FED, JANETIELEN, AND LARRY
SUMMERS.
DAVID, ARE THEY THE
FRONT-RUNNERS?
AND IF SO, WHY?
>> I THINK THEY'RE THE
FRONT-RUNNERS.
I THINK THEY'RE BOTH PEOPLE WHO
ARE IN SYNC WITH THE PRESIDENT.
IN SOME RESPECTS-- ALTHOUGH
THEY'VE BEEN SEEN AS RIVALS --
THEY HAVE MORE IN COMMON THAN
THEY HAVE APART.
LARRYSOMEERS IS A PRODUCT OF
HARVARD, JANET YELLIN OF YALE.
THEY BOTH SEEM STRONGLY AT THIS
TIME IN OUR ECONOMIC HISTORY,
THE GOVERNMENT, PARTICULARLY THE
FISCAL SIDE OF GOVERNMENT-- TAX
AND SPEND AGO SHOULD BE MORE
AGGRESSIVE.
BOTH OF THEM BELIEVE THE FED HAS
A PRETTY IMPORTANT ROLE TO PLAY
IN GETTING THE ECONOMY GOING
AGAIN.
I THINK THERE MAY BE SOME
DIFFERENCES IN NUANCE ABOUT HOW
THEY WOULD ACTUALLYIN ACTUALLY E
JOB WHEN THEY GOT THERE.
THEIR PERSONALITIES ARE VERY
DIFFERENT.
I THINK IN TERMS OF THE FED
POLICY WE'D EXPECT, I THINK
THERE'S NOT THAT MUCH DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN THEM.
>> Woodruff: I WANT TO ASK YOU
ABOUT THAT.
THERE ARE PROMINENT DEMOCRATS
COMING OUT AND TALKING ABOUT
LARRY SUMMERS' POSITION ON
DEREGULATION BEFORE THE
FINANCIAL COLLAPSE IN 2008, AND
THEY'RE QUESTIONING WHETHER IF
LARRY SUMMERES WERE CHOSEN THE
CURRENT FED POLICY OF BOND
BUYING, STIMULATING THE ECONOMY,
GETTING THE GOVERNMENT INVOLVED
IN THE ECONOMY, WOULD CONTINUE.
>> WELL, I THINK WHAT SUMMERS
HAS SAID IS THAT HE DOESN'T
THINK THIS QUANTITATIVE EASING,
THIS BOND BUYING DOES MUCH GOOD,
BUT HE DOESN'T THINK IT DOES
MUCH HARM, EITHER.
SO ON THAT BALANCE, GIVEN HOW
BAD THE ECONOMY SI THINK YOU
WOULD EXPECT HIM TO CONTINUE THE
POLICIES OF BERNANKE, WHICH MAY
INVOLVE PULLING BACK.
BUT ON REGULATORY THINGS, I
THINK THERE IS A DIFFERENCE.
MR. SUMMERS HAS BECOME A SYMBOL
OF THE CLINTON-ERA DEREGULATION
OF THE FINANCIAL MARKETS AND I
THINK PEOPLE OBJECTING TO HIM ON
SUBSTANCE, AS OPPOSED TO
PERSONALITY-- WHICH IS A WHOLE
OTHER ISSUE-- ARE WORRIED HE IS
TOO CLOSE TO WALL STREET.
HE'S ACTUALLY BEEN WORKING FOR
CITYBANK IN HIS YEARS SINCE
LEAVING THE WHITE HOUSE-- AND
NOT SKEPTICAL ENOUGH OF THE
BANKS AND THEY THINK JANET
YELLIN WOULD BE MORE SO.
>> Woodruff: I WANTED TO ASK
YOU ABOUT THAT.
WHEN IT COMES TO THE POLITICAL
LEADERSHIP IN THE-- IN THIS STEE
AND WALL STREET, HOW DO THEY SEE
JANET YELLIN?
>> I THINK A LOT OF THEM SEE
JANET YELLIN AS THE NOT LARRY
SUMMERS.
HE SEEMS TO BE A NUMBER OF
DETRACTORS AMONG LIBERAL
DEMOCRATS IN THE SENATE AND
HOUSE.
A BUNCH OF HOUSE WOMEN SIGNED A
PETITION TODAY CALLING TO THE
PRESIDENT TO APPOINT JANET
YELLIN.
BUT SOME OF THIS IS JUST KIND OF
POSTURING.
THE REAL DECISION MAKER HERE IS
THE PRESIDENT.
HE KNOWS LARRY SUMMERS MUCH
BETTER THAN HE KNOWS JANET
YELLIN.
HE SEEMS TO FEEL, FROM WHAT HE
SAID TO MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE AND
SENATE CAUCUSES TODAY, THAT IT'S
IMPORTANT TO HAVE SOMEONE WHO IS
A GOOD CRISIS MANAGER, AND THAT
KIND OF SOUNDS MORE LIEB THE
SUMMERS RESUME THAN THE YELLIN
RESUME.
BUT THIS BLOW-BACK COULD
INFLUENCE HIS DECISION.
>> Woodruff: AS YOU MENTIONED,
SUMMERS' NAME CAME UP IN THE
SESSION THE PRESIDENT HAD WITH
DEMOCRATIC MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
AND THEY WERE CRITICAL.
>> AND HE SEEMS TO HAVE DEFENDED
LARRY SUMMERS, ALTHOUGH WE'RE
NOT ROOM AND WE DON'T KNOW THE
CONTEXT.
THE OTHER THING INTERESTING, HE
MENTIONED A THIRD PLAYER, DON
COHEN, WHO WOULD BE A SURPRISE
DARK HORSE, BUT I THINK IT WAS
THE PRESIDENT'S WAY OF SAYING
LET'S NOT BOIL THIS DOWN TO A
JANET VERSUS LARRY MUDD FEST.
>> Woodruff: YOU MENTIONED THE
WOMEN MEMBERS OF CONGRESS WHO
SIGNED THIS PETITION.
HOW MUCH IS GENDER SEEN AS A
FACTOR?
SHE WOULD BE THE FIRST WOMAN.
>> YOU KNOW, IT'S HARD TO
EXCLUDE GENDER AS A FACTOR.
ON ONE HAND, YOU HAVE LARRY
SUMMERS WHO GOT THROWN OUT OF
THE PRESIDENCY IN HARVARD IN
PART BECAUSE HE MADE SOME
OFFENSIVE REMARKS ABOUT WOMEN
AND SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING.
YOU HAVE THE PRESIDENT WHO IS
ACCUSED OF RUNNING AN "OLD BOY"
NETWORK.
YOU HAVE A VERY CREDIBLE FEMALE
CANDIDATE.
SO THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO THINK IF
YOU CAN'T GET A FEMALE CHAIRMAN
OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE NOW, IF
NOT NOW, WHEN?
ON THE OTHER HAND, I SUSPECT
THAT TO SOME EXTENT THE
PRESIDENT'S GOING TO THINK ABOUT
THAT AND MAKE A CHOICE ON OTHER
FACTORS, BUT OUTSIDE THE WHITE
HOUSE, THAT SEEMS TO HAVE TAKEN
A HUGE ROLE.
>> Woodruff: IT WAS NOTICED
THE ADMINISTRATION NAMED A WOMAN
DEPUTY TREASURY SECRETARY TODAY,
AND WONDERED IF THERE WAS ANY--
>> WELL, IT'S INTERESTING.
IT'S A WOMAN WHO COMES FROM THE
FEDERAL RESERVE.
SO THERE ARE TWO FEMALE
GOVERNORS ON THE FEDERAL RESERVE
BOARD NOW, AND IN ADDITION TO
JANET YELLIN, THEY'RE BOTH
LEAVING.
ONE RESIGNED.
I EXPECT IT HAD NOTHING TO DO
WITH THE FED CHAIRMANSHIP BUT IT
CERTAINLY WILL BE CITE BIDE THE
WHITE HOUSE IF THEY APPOINT
LARRY SUMMERS OR SOME OTHER MAN,
THEY'LL POINT TO THE FACT THAT'S
WE HAVE A WOMAN TREASURY
SECRETARY, AND A WOMAN HEAD OF
THE BUDGET OFFICE.
>> Woodruff: DAVID WESSEL,
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Brown: WE RETURN AGAIN TO THE
TURMOIL IN EGYPT.
THE COUNTRY'S CABINET ANNOUNCED
A FURTHER CRACKDOWN AGAINST THE
MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD TODAY,
ORDERING THE CLEAR OUT OF THE
GROUP'S PROTEST SITES.
MARGARET WARNER REPORTS.
>> Warner: THE ORDER TO POLICE
TO DISBAND THE PROTESTS CAME
FROM THE INTERIM GOVERNMENT THIS
AFTERNOON.
>> RELYING ON THE PEOPLE'S
MANDATE TO THE STATE TO DEAL
WITH TERRORISM AND VIOLENCE,
WHICH THREATEN THE FALL OF THE
STATE AND DESTRUCTION OF THE
NATION.
THE CABINET HAS DECIDED TO TAKE
ALL MEANS NECESSARY TO FACE
THESE DANGERS AND PUT AND END TO
IT.
>> Warner: AS THE NEWS SPREAD,
SUPPORTERS OF OUSTED PRESIDENT
MORSI STOOD WARILY AT THEIR TWO
CAMPSITES IN CAIRO, SCENES OF
THEIR MONTH-LONG, STANDOFF WITH
THE REGIME.
A SENIOR OFFICIAL OF MORSI'S
MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD ISSUED A
BLOODY RECAFOST.
>> ( translated ): THERE ARE
EXPECTATIONS OF A MASSACRE
TAKING PLACE IN FRONT OF THE
EYES OF THE WHOLE WORLD.
THE FREE PEOPLE IN EGYPT AND THE
WORLD MUST STAND AGAINST THIS
STUPID CABINET MANDATE FOR THE
POLICE TO END THE SIT-IN
PROTESTS.
>> Warner: OVER THE WEEKEND,
SECURITY FORCES BATTLED PRO-
MORSI DEMONSTRATORS, KILLING
MORE THAN 80.
IT WAS THE WORST SPASM OF
VIOLENCE SINCE MORSI WAS DEPOSED
JULY 3.
HUNDREDS MORE WERE INJURED AND
BODIES OF THE DEAD OVERWHELMED
MAKESHIFT MORGUES.
IN WASHINGTON TODAY, U.S. STATE
DEPARTMENT SPOKESWOMAN MARIE
HARF VOICED CONCERN ABOUT
TODAY'S ANNOUNCEMENT.
THAT EGYPTIAN POLICE WILL PUT AN
END TO THE PROTESTS.
>> WELL WE'VE URGED THE INTERIM
GOVERNMENT AND SECURITY FORCES
TO RESPECT THE RIGHT OF PEACEFUL
ASSEMBLY.
THAT OBVIOUSLY INCLUDES SIT INS.
>> Warner: SO FAR, THE OBAMA
WHITE HOUSE HAS REFUSED TO LABEL
MORSI'S OUSTER A COUP.
THAT DESIGNATION WOULD FORCE A
SUSPENSION OF U.S. AID.
THE ADMINISTRATION HAS PUT A
HOLD ON THE SALE OF FOUR F-16s
TO EGYPT.
BUT TODAY, IN THE U.S. SENATE,
KENTUCKY REPUBLICAN RAND PAUL
MADE A BID TO CUT OFF ALL U.S.
MILITARY AID ENTIRELY.
>> DO YOU KNOW WHAT THE MONEY IS
SPENT ON?
TANKS.
TANKS ROLL OR PEVEOPLE IN
PROTEST.
I HAVE NO LOVE LOST FOR THE
MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD BUT THEY'VE
DISAPPEARED THEM.
WE'RE GOING TO BE GIVING MONEY
TO THE MILITARY TO DISAPPEARING
PEOPLE.
>> Warner: THAT DREW FIRE EVEN
FROM FELLOW REPUBLICANS.
LINDSEY GRAHAM OF SOUTH CAROLINA
SAID CONTINUING THE U.S.
MILITARY AID IS CRUCIAL.
>> BUT WHY ARE WE SELLING
WEAPONS TO EGYPT?
BECAUSE IF WE DON'T, SOMEONE
ELSE WILL.
IT'S NOT A QUESTION OF WHEERTH
THEY'RE GOING TO BUY FIGHTER
PLANES, IT'S A QUESTION OF WHO
THEY'RE GOING TO BUY THEM FROM.
>> Warner: IN THE END, PAUL'S
MEASURE WAS SOUNDLY REJECTED.
FOR MORE ON TODAY'S ANNOUNCEMENT
BY EGYPT'S NEW GOVERNMENT, AND
HOW THE U.S. IS HANDLING THE
TURMOIL THERE, I'M JOINED BY
MICHELE DUNNE, DIRECTOR OF THE
ATLANTIC COUNCIL'S CENTER FOR
THE MIDDLE EAST.
AND SAMER SHEHATA, ASSOCIATE
PROFESSOR OF INTERNATIONAL
STUDIES AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
OKLAHOMA.
WELCOME BACK TO BOTH OF YOU.
MR. SHEHATA, LET ME START WITH
YOU, WHAT IS BEHIND THE NEW
GOVERNMENT'S DECISION TO MAKE
THIS ANNOUNCEMENT AND MAKE IT
CLEAR THEY'RE NOT EVEN GOING TO
ALLOW PEACEFUL DEMONSTRATIONS?
>> WELL, I THINK THEY HAVE COME
TO THE CONCLUSION THE CONTINUED
SIT-INS ARE AN OBSTACLE TO THE
TRANSITION PLAN THEY'VE PUT
FORWARD AND AN OBSTACLE, ALSO,
FOR EGYPT REGAINING SOME KIND OF
STABILITY.
AND THAT MEANS INTERNATIONAL
INVESTMENT, THE WHEELS OF
COMMERCE AND THE ECONOMY MOVING
FORWARD, AND THAT THEY NEED TO
END THE SIT-INS, AND I THINK
SOME BELIEVE OR HOPE TO
ERADICATE THE MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD
FROM EGYPTIAN POLITICS?
>> Warner: DO YOU THINK
THEY'RE TRYING TO CRUSH THE
MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD, NOT JUST
QUELL THE DEMONSTRATIONS, LET
TRAFFIC FLOW AGAIN BUT ACTUALLY
PUT THEM OUT OF BUSINESS?
>> WELL, THAT SEEMS TO BE THE
EFFORT.
SEVERAL OF THE SENIOR LEADERS OF
THE BROTHERHOOD TODAY WERE
CHARGED WITH SOME SERIOUS
CRIMES.
THERE'S BEEN TALK OF EVEN
OUTLAWING THE BROTHERHOOD AS A
MOVEMENT, AND IT WAS OUTLAWED IN
THE PAST.
SO THAT SEEMS TO BE THE CASE.
NOW, THERE MAY BE AN EFFORT HERE
TO PUT ON ENOUGH PRESSURE TO GET
THE BROTHERHOOD TO JUST ACCEPT
THE NEW REALITY, ACCEPT THAT
MORSI WAS REMOVED AND THAT THE
POLITICAL GAME MOVES ON.
HOWEVER --
>> Warner: IT'S TIME FOR THEM
TO GET IN THE GAME, WHICH IS
WHAT THE GOVERNMENT IS SAYING.
>> IT SEEMS UNLIKELY THE
BROTHERHOOD IS GOING TO ACCEPT
THAT.
>> Warner: THIS NEW
GOVERNMENT-- THE GENERAL IS
CLEARLY A CENTRAL ROLE.
THERE IS THIS CIVILIAN
GOVERNMENT.
ARE THEY BEHIND THIS?
OR IS THE MILITARY RUNNING THE
SHOW?
>> I THINK CLEARLY THE GENERAL
IS RUNG THE SHOW, AND THEY ARE
BEHIND IT TO A CERTAIN EXTENT.
THERE ARE-- THERE'S TALK THAT
ONE HAS THREATENED TO RESIGN.
AGAIN, I THINK THERE'S ANOTHER
POINT THAT NEEDS TO BE MADE
HERE.
A NUMBER OF MINISTERS IN
GOVERNMENT ARE MUBARAK HOLDOVERS
WHO HAVE REEMERGED SO THERE IS A
FEAR AMONG SOME THAT THEY ARE
RECONSTITUTING THEMSELVES.
>> THIS WILL BE-- IF THEY DO
CRACK DOWN ON THE SIT-IN, THIS
WILL BE THE THIRD TIME.
WE'VE HAD TWO OTHER SIT-INS,
WHERE THE POLICE USED A GREAT
DEAL OF FORCE, AND SOMEWHERE
BETWEEN 50 AND 80 PEOPLE WERE
KILLED THE FIRST TIME, INSPECTOR
BETWEEN EIGHTY AND 120 THE
SECOND TIME.
AND, YOU KNOW, WHAT WE'RE
HEARING IS THAT THESE PRO-MORSI
DEMONSTRATORS HAVE NO INTENTION
OF LEAVING.
>> Warner: NOW HOW HAS THE
BROTHERHOOD BEEN HANDLING THIS?
THERE WERE REPORTS IN MID-JULY
ABOUT 10 DAYS AFTER MORSI WAS
OUSTEHA
WERE TALKS GOING ON BETWEEN SOME
OF THE BROTHERHOOD SENIOR
LEADERSHIP AND THE MILITARY
ABOUT REACHING SOME
ACCOMMODATION.
HAS THAT JUST BROKEN DOWN, OR
WAS THAT FOR REAL?
>> IT'S NOT CLEAR WHAT KIND OF A
DIALOGUE IS TAKING PLACE BETWEEN
THE BROTHER EXPHOOD CURRENT
RULERS OF EGYPT PAPS YOU KNOW,
CATHERINE ASHTON, WAS THERE AND
SHE MET WITH THE BROTHERHOOD
PEOPLE AS WELL AS PEOPLE IN THE
GOVERNMENT.
THERE IS LIKELY THERE IS SOME
NEGOTIATION.
I THINK MICHELE IS RIGHT-- BOTH
SIDES ARE FLEXING THEIR MUSCLE
AND TRYING TO REACH SOME KIND OF
A DEAL.
I THINK IT'S UNLIKELY, BUT
NORTHEASTERN UNIVERSITY, THERE
IS SOMETHING GOING ON THERE.
THE BROTHERHOOD WANT TO BE BAND.
THEY DON'T WANT THE LEADERSHIP
IMPEREZONNED.
THEY DON'T WANT THE FUNDS
CONFISCATED.
THEY WANT A ROLE IN POLITICS.
AT THE SAME TIME, THEY HAVE TO
GET ON BOARD THAT THIS IS A
POST-MORSI WORLD.
>> Warner: WHAT I'M BEING TOLD
IS THE BROTHERHOOD IS SAYING
THEIR NON-NEGOTIATAL DEMAND IS
MORSI HAS TO BE REINSTATE ODOR A
FIG LEAF.
>> THE BROTHER HOOPPED IS TRYING
TO HOLD ON TO THE MORAL HIGH
GROUND THAT THEY FEEL THEY HAD,
THAT THEY HAD A DEMOCRATICALLY
ELECTED PRESIDENT REMOVED BY
COUP.
THERE ARE SOME INITIATIVES TO,
FOR EXAMPLE, ALLOW THERE TO BE A
REFERENDUM OR SOME KIND OF A
VOTE.
THE BROTHERHOOD MIGHT AGREE TO
SOMETHING LIKE THAT, BUT SO FAR,
WE'VE HAD NO INDICATION THAT THE
MILITARY, WHICH IS AS SAMER
SAID, CALLING THE SHOTS, WOULD
BE WILLING TO DO SOMETHING LIKE
THAT.
>> Warner: SO TO BOTH OF YOU,
WHO DOES THIS DO TO THE QUAND
REERK THE FINE LINE THE U.S. HAS
BEEN TRYING TO WALK NOW FOR
NEARLY A MONTH, SINCE JULY 3--
NOT CALLING THIS A COUP, NOT
CUTTING OFF AID, A LOT OF
BACKCHANNEL COMMUNICATIONS,
RIGHT, BETWEEN DEFENSE
SECRETARY, SECRETARY OF STATE,
AND THEIR COUNTER-PARTS.
I MEAN, IS THE U.S. HAVING ANY
INFLUENCE AT ALL?
WHAT DOES TODAY'S DEVELOPMENT DO
TO THEIR ABILITY TO KEEP THAT
BALANCING ACT GOING?
>> I THINK THE UNITED STATES
REALLY HAS TO MAKE IT CLEAR--
NOT NECESSARILY PUBLICLY BUT
CERTAINLY PRIVATELY-- THAT IF
THE U.S.-EGYPTIAN RELATIONSHIP
IS GOING TO BE MAINTAINED, HUMAN
RIGHTS HAVE TO BE RECOGNIZED,
AND THERE CAN'T BE AN EXCESSIVE
USE OF FORCE AGAINST ANY
PROTESTERS, WHETHER IT'S THE
BROTHERHOOD OR OTHERS.
AND I HOPE THAT MESSAGE IS BEING
MADE AT THE HIGHEST LEVEL.
>> Warner: DO YOU THINK IT'S
GETTING THROUGH?
>> IT DOESN'T SEEM THAT THE
EGYPTIAN MILITARY LEADERSHIP HAS
TAKEN ANY OF THE ADVICE THE U.S.
HAS GIVEN.
YOU KNOW, AS THIS WHOLE THING
HAS UNFOLDED OVER THE LAST FEW
WEEKS.
LOOK, EGYPT IS A BIG, IMPORTANT
COUNTRY, IT'S NEXT DOOR TO
ISRAEL.
THE UNITED STATES IS VERY
RELUCTANT TO CUT EGYPT LOOSE.
THAT'S WHAT THEY THEY FEEL THEY
WOULD BE DOING BY SUSPENDING
ASSISTANCE BUT THE UNITED STATES
IS GOING TO BE FACING A WHOLE
DIFFERENT QUESTION IN THE COMING
WEEKS.
IF THERE REALLY IS THIS FULL-ON
CONFRONTATION BETWEEN THE
BROTHERHOOD AND THE MILITARY AND
A REAL CRACKDOWN THE QUESTION
FOR THE UNITED STATES IS GOING
TO BECOME CAN WE BE COMPLICITY
IN THIS?
WITH KEY CONTINUE TO SEND AID TO
A MILITARY CARRYING OUT THIS
KIND OF OPPRESSN?IO
>> Warner: MICHELE DUNNE, THE
BROTHER HOOPPED IS BASICALLY
SAYING NOW THIS NEW GOVERNMENT,
SUPPOSEDLY REPRESENTING
DEMOCRATIC FORCES, IS JUST
REVERTING TO THE OLD REPRESSION
OF THE MUBARAK ERA?
ARE THEY RIGHT ABOUT THAT?
IS THAT A FAIR CHARGE?
THE INTERIOR MINISTER HAS MADE
SOME REALLY TROUBLING STATEMENTS
UNTIL LAST FEW DAYS.
AS SAMER INDICATED THIS CABINET
SAY REAL MIX.
YOU HAVE SOME LIBERALS AND SO
FORTH, AND OLD MUBARAK PEOPLE
BUT THE INTERIOR MINISTER HAS
BEEN SAYING BASICALLY WE'RE BACK
AND THE SECRET POLICE ARE BACK
AND WE'RE GOING TO START
MONITORING POLITICS AND RELIGION
AND SO FORTH AS WE DID IN THE
MUBARAK ERA.
>> THIS IS THE TRAGEDY OF THE
SITUATION, I THINK WE ARE
FURTHER AWAY FROM THE
ASPIRATIONS OF THE UPRISING THAT
LED TO THE OVERTHROW OF MUBARAK
NOW THAN WE'VE HAVE EVER HAVE
BEEN.
WE WANT AID SOCIETY BASED ON THE
RULE OF LAW, RECOGNITION OF
POLITICAL RIGHTS THE, POLICE TO
RECOGNIZE THE DIGNITY OF
CITIZENS AND NOT ABUSE THEM
REGULARLY-- AS WAS THE CASE--
CIVILIAN CONTROL OF THE MILITARY
AND CIVILIAN FORCES AND WE'RE
NOT SEEING THAT.
>> Warner: SAMER SHEHATA,
MICHELE DUNNE, THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: AND NOW WE TAKE A LOOK
AT ILLEGAL CHILD LABOR IN INDIA
AND THE ONGOING STRUGGLE TO END
IT.
"NEWSHOUR" SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
FRED DE SAM LAZARO REPORTS.
>> Reporter: HEN KAILASH
SATYARTI CONDUCTS RESCUE RAIDS
OF UNDERAGE WORKERS, HE ALWAYS
BRING ALONG CAMERAS TO DOCUMENT
EVIDENCE.
ON A HOT SUMMER AFTERNOON,
SATYARTI'S GROUP QUIETLY FANNED
OUT IN THE CITY'S BAKERY
DISTRICT, ROUNDING UP CHILDREN
INTO WAITING VEHICLES.
A LOCAL MAGISTRATE AND POLICE
CONTINGENT WERE ALONG IN CASE
THERE WAS ANY TROUBLE.
>> Reporter: AT A GOVERNMENT
PROCESSING CENTER, THEY'D
DETERMINE IF THESE CHILDREN WERE
ALREADY REGISTERED AS MISSING OR
IF THEY'D BEEN SOLD TO THEIR
EMPLOYERS.
>> THESE ARE ALL GOVERNMENT
OFFICIALS, A MAGISTRATE, THEY'RE
ALL HERE TO HELP YOU.
>> Reporter: THAT'S WHAT HE SAID
TO THE YOUNG MEN.
HE TOLD ME NOT ALL OFFICIALS ARE
RELIABLE ALLIES AND THAT THIS
DAYS TOTAL OF 22, FOR INSTANCE,
SHOULD HAVE BEEN MUCH BIGGER, HE
>> WE WANTED TO RESCUE AT LEAST
50 TO 60 CHILDREN FROM TWO AREAS
BUT MANY OF THEM ARE ALREADY
HIDDEN SO WHEN WE REACHED THERE
WE COULD NOT FIND MOST OF THE
CHILDREN.
>> Reporter: WHO TIPS THEM OFF?
SOMETIMES POLICE, SOMETIMES
OTHER AUTHORITIES OR SOMETIMES
THE LOCAL PEOPLE.
HE SAID THE COMBINATION OF
OFFICIAL AND MIDDLE CLASS
INDIFFERCE AENND DIRE POVERTY
DRIVES PERHAPS 50 MILLION INDIAN
CHILDREN INTO THE WORKPLACE.
MOST ARE FROM THE MINORITY
MUSLIM, TRIBAL OR LOWER CASTE
HINDU COMMUNITIES.
MANY ARE BONDED-SOLD, THAT IS,
INTO VIRTUAL SLAVERY.
THERE CONDITIONS AS INVISIBLE AS
THEY ARE DEPLORABLE.
qtr LET ME SEE YOUR HANDS.
WHAT WE HAVE SAID IS THAT
CHILDREN'S HANDS SHOULD HAVE
BOOKS IN THEM, PEN AND PENCILS
IN THEM.
>> ( translated ): BUT IN OUR
HELPLESSNESS, WE HAVE TO DO WHAT
WE DO.
>> ( translated ): HELPLESS,
YES, BUT WE WILL SEE TO YOUR
STUDIES AND TRY TO GET WORK FOR
YOUR MOTHER AND FATHER, GOD
WILLING.
>> Reporter: INDIA ACTUALLY HAS
LAWS AGAINST CHILD LABOR.
SCHOOL IS MANDATORY UP TO AGE
14.
AND THERE ARE FUNDS TO
REHABILITATE RESCUED CHILDREN.
DESPITE ALL THAT, SATYARTI SAYS
IT'S MAINLY UP TO AGENCIES LIKE
HIS TO MAKE SURE THE LAWS ARE
ACTUALLY IMPLEMENTED.
>> ( translated ): I AM FREE!
I AM FREE!
>> THIS IS MUKTI ASHRAM, A
TRANSITORY REHABILITATION CENTER
FOR FREED BONDED CHILDREN.
ALL THE CHILDREN HAVE BEEN
RESCUED BY US OVER THE LAST ONE
MONTH OR SO.
FIRST OF ALL WE HAVE TO ASSERT
IN THEM THAT THEY ARE FREE.
>> Reporter: THEY HAVEN'T
CONCEPTUALIZED IT YET?
NOT REALLY BECAUSE THEY CANNOT
DO IT SO FAST.
>> Reporter: ONE TELL TALE
SYMPTOM THESE THE TWO PRE
ADOLESCENT NEWCOMERS STILL WERE
NOT COMFORTABLE ENOUGH TO
TRUTHFULLY ANSWER SHOWED OF
THEIR ORDEAL CAME IN RESPONSE TO
A SIMPLE FIRST QUESTION:
HOW OLD ARE YOU?
"15," THEY SAID, IN BOYS CHOIR
VOICES.
15, A LEGAL WORKING AGE.
MORE ACCURATE ARE THE STORIES
THEY SHARED-OF ABUSE WHEN THEY
WORKED IN THE EMBROIDERY
BUSINESS, NOTORIOUS FOR ITS USE
OF CHILDREN.
>> ( translated ):  WE WORKED
FROM 8:00 A.M. UNTIL 12
MIDNIGHT.
>> ( translated ): IF YOU WERE
>> Reporter: NIAZ ALI TOLD OF
HOW, ONE DAY, A TRAFFICKER CAME
HE GAVE NIAZ'S PARENTS MONEY TO
TAKE THE BOY TO BOMBAY WHERE HE
PROMISED HE'D BE TAUGHT A TRADE
AND COULD EARN A GOOD LIVING.
HOW MUCH MONEY DID THEY GIVE
YOUR PARENTS?
>> 20,000.
>> Repoer: rtTHAT'S ABOUT $400,
A LARGE SUM FOR PARENTS WHO WERE
NOT DIFFICULT TO CONVINCE THAT
THIS IS THEIR CHILD'S TICKET OUT
OF DIRE POVERTY.
>> ALMOST ALL THE PARENTS ARE
ILLITERATE.
IN MOST CASES, THE PARENTS HAVE
NOT TRAVELED TO DELHI OR MUMBAI
OR BIG PLACES, SO THEY HAVE NO
IDEA ABOUT THE DISTANCE.
I ALWAYS ADVOCATE THAT POVERTY,
CHILD LABOR AND ILLITERACY ARE
THREE INTERRELATED CAUSE AND
CONSEQUENCE FACTORS.
>> Reporter: KAILASH SATYARTI IS
AN ENGINEER BY TRAINING BUT
CALLS HIMSELF A GANDHIAN BY
INSPIRATION.
HE BEGAN HIS ADVOCACY 30 YEARS
AGO IN INDIA'S RUG INDUSTRY-
WHERE CHILD LABOR WAS PERVASIVE-
TAKING A MESSAGE TO CONSUMERS IN
GERMANY AND THE U.S.
>> I HAD A STRONG BELIEF THAT
ONCE A PERSON IS SENSITIZED
TOWARDS CHILD SLAVERY, WHETHER
IT COULD BE CARPET OR SHOES OR
APPARELS, YOU CANNOT LIMIT THAT
SOCIAL CONCERN AND SOCIAL
MOTIVATION AND THAT WORKED.
>> Reporter: TODAY, A GROUP HE
FOUNDED, NOW CALLED GOODWEAVE,
OFFERS A LABELING SYSTEM THAT
GUARANTEES THAT NO CHILD LABOR
HAS BEEN USED IN MAKING TH
DOZENS OF RUG MERCHANTS AND
RETAILERS IN THE U.S., LIKE
SOME 70 INDIAN EXPORTERS HAVE
LICENSING AGREEMENTS WITH
GOODWEAVE.
THEY AGREE TO UNANNOUNCED
INSPECTIONS OF THEIR FACTORIES
AND SUPPLIERS LIKE THIS ONE IN
THE NORTHERN CITY OF VARANASI,
PRODUCING RUGS BOUND FOR
AUSTRALIA.
>> NAMASTE.
>> Reporter: AFTER A QUICK LOOK
AROUND, GOODWEAVE STAFFERS
INTERVIEWED WEAVERS AND EXAMINED
EMPLOYMENT RECORDS.
THIS PRODUCER GOT A CLEAN BILL
OF HEALTH.
BUT INSPECTOR JAVED SAYS ITS
STILL SOMETIMES A CAT AND MOUSE
GAME.
>> ( translated ): SOMETIMES
WELL ENTER A PLACE AND HEAR
PEOPLE RUNNING OR SCATTERING,
AND YOU HAVE TO BELIEVE THAT
THEY'RE USING CHILDREN.
IF THERE ARE JUST ADULTS THERE'D
BE NO REASON FOR PEOPLE TO RUN.
>> Reporter: GOODWEAVE INDIAS
CHIEF MANOJ BHATT SAYS A BIG
CHALLENGE FOR WESTERN IMPORTERS
IS TO KNOW WHETHER TO TRUST ALL
THE LAYERS OF SUBCONTRACTORS.
AT LEAST 500 SUPPLY GOODWEAVES
70 APPROVED LICENSEES.
>> THE SUPPLY CHAIN IS VERY,
VERY DECENTRALIZED AND SCATTERED
IN DIFFERENT DISTRICTS, AND
SOMETIMES IN DIFFERENT STATES IN
INDIA.
SO THEY HAVE TO BELIEVE WHAT
THEIR EXPORTERS ARE TELLING THEM
AND EVEN FOR EXPORTERS, ITS
IT'S REALLY HARD TO ACTUALLY
KEEP TRACK OF WHAT IS HAPPENING
IN THEIR SUPPLY CHAINS.
>> Reporter: IT'S VILLAGES LIKE
THIS IN EASTERN UTTAR PRADESH
THAT ARE THE STARTING LINKS IN
THE LONG SUPPLY CHAIN THAT LEADS
TO THE EXPORT HOUSES AND RUG
SHOWROOMS IN THE WEST.
FROM DAWN TO DUSK YOU CAN HEAR
THE SOUND OF HUNDREDS OF CARPET
LOOMS.
THEY'RE HOUSED IN RAMSHACKLE
BUILDINGS.
WE POPPED IN UNANNOUNCED, POSING
AS TOURISTS AND AT TIMES
RECEIVED AS PROSPECTIVE BUYERS.
USING HIDDEN CAMERAS AND CELL
PHONES-IN UTTAR PRADESH AND EVEN
MORE REMOTE AREAS LIKE THE MALDA
DISTRICT NEAR BANGLADESH, IT WAS
EASY TO DOCUMENT CLEARLY
UNDERAGE BOYS TOILING ALONGSIDE
VETERANS, WHO'D PROBABLY BEING
DOING HERE SINCE THEY WERE BOYS.
THE APPROPRIATE AUTHORITIES
RARELY PATROL HERE AND GOOD
WEAVES BHATT SAYS IT'S OUT OF
THEIR CONTROL.
>> THAT'S ONE OF OUR
LIMITATIONS.
WE CANNOT ACCESS LOOMS, WHICH
ARE NOT PART OF OUR LICENSEES.
>> Reporter: WHEN THEY ARE
DISCOVERED, BOYS LIKE ZAHIDUL
ARE RETURNED TO THEIR FAMILIES.
HE WAS FOUND FOUR YEARS AGO WHEN
HE WAS TEN.
POVERTY MIGHT HAVE DRIVEN HIM TO
WORK BUT ZAHIDUL WAS NOT
TRAFFICKED INTO THE JOB.
HIS MOTHER FARATUN BIBI SAYS HE
VOLUNTEERED TO GO TO WORK IN THE
CARPET BUSINESS AFTER HIS
FATHER, THE FAMILY BREAD WINNER,
SUFFERED A STROKE, WORSENING
THEIR ALREADY DESPERATE
CONDITION.
>> ( translated ): AFTER HIS
ILLNESS, ZAHIDUL HIMSELF SAID,
"MOM, WHY DON'T YOU LET ME GO TO
WORK?
I COULD EARN SOME MONEY.
IN FACT THE MIDDLEMAN DIDN'T
WANT TO TAKE HIM, SAID HE WAS
UNDERAGE.
BUT I PLEADED WITH HIM, PLEASE
DO IT FOR ME.
>> Reporter: JUST DAYS AFTER HE
BEGAN WORKING ZAHIDUL WAS FOUND
HIDING IN A CARPET FACTORY
HUNDREDS OF MILES FROM HIS HOME.
>> ( translated ): THEY TOLD ME
TO ROLL MYSELF INTO A BLANKET,
THAT PEOPLE WERE COMING TO GET
ME AND PUT ME IN SCHOOL.
>> Reporter: GOODWEAVE DID ENROL
HIM IN SCHOOL BUT ALSO PROVIDES
SETHIOMNG NEITHER PARENTS NOR
HIS TWO OLDER SIBLINGS EVER DID.
A STIPEND EACH MONTH TO HELP THE
FAMILY MAKE ENDS MEET.
NOW 14, ZAHIDUL IS IN FOURTH
GRADE AND STILL STRUGGLES.
HE MAY NEVER THRIVE IN SCHOOL
BUT GOODWEAVES BHATT SAYS EVEN
BASIC READING ABILITY CAN BE
USEFUL.
ARITHMETIC IS ESSENTIAL TO COUNT
ONES SALARY.
>> THE IDEA HERE IS TO BREAK
THAT CYCLE OF ILLITERACY, SO
THAT THIS, YOU KNOW, LITERATE
PERSON CAN, YOU KNOW, UNDERSTAND
THE VALUE OF EDUCATION FOR THEIR
KIDS AND, YOU KNOW, IN THE NEXT
>> Reporter: GOODWEAVE, WHICH
HAS OFFICIES IN WASHINGTON DCSOF
CHILDREN WORKING IN SOUTH ASIAN
RUG LOOMS IS DOWN TO ABOUT A
FOURTH OF THE ONE MILLION WHO
ONCE DID.
KAILASH SATYARTI HAS SHIFTED HIS
IT COMES AT A COST.
HE'S BEEN BEATEN UP SEVERAL
TIMES AND TWO COLLEAGUES LOST
THEIR LIVES.
CHILD LABOR IS A CRITICAL PART
OF INDIA'S LARGELY UNORGANIZED
ECONOMY, HE SAYS, AND FOR ONE
SIMPLE REASON: THEY'RE CHEAP.
YOU CAN BUY A CHILD FOR LESSER
PRICE THAN AN ANIMAL.
BUFFALOS AND COWS ARE MUCH MORE
EXPENSIVE THAN BUYING A CHILD TO
WORK FULL TIME FOR THE WHOLE OF
HIS LIFE.
>> Reporter: IT'S ONE
EXPLANATION HE SAYS WHY INDIA
HAS 50 MILLION CHILDREN WORKING
FULL TIME AND AT THE SAME TIME
50 MILLION ADULTS-- MANY OF THEM
PARENTS OF THOSE WORKING
CHILDREN-- ARE UNEMPLOYED.
>> Ifill: FRED'S REPORTING IS A
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE UNDER-TOLD
STORIES PROJECT AT SAINT MARY'S
UNIVERSITY IN MINNESOTA.
>> Brown: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
RELEASED CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS
OUTLINING THE NATIONAL SECURITY
AGENCY'S MASSIVE COLLECTION OF
DOMESTIC PHONE RECORDS.
THE FEDERAL RESERVE DOWNGRADED
ITS ASSESSMENT OF ECONOMIC
GROWTH FROM MODERATE TO MODEST.
THE U.S. HOUSE GAVE FINAL
APPROVAL TO A BILL LINKING
INTEREST RATES ON STUDENT LOANS
TO THE FINANCIAL MARKETS MEANING
A CUT THIS FALL.
AND EGYPT'S MILITARY-BACKED
RULERS ORDERED POLICE TO PUT AN
END TO SIT-INS BY SUPPORTERS OF
OUSTED PRESIDENT MORSI.
A CABINET STATEMENT SAID THE
ONGOING PROTESTS ARE A THREAT TO
NATIONAL SECURITY.
>> Ifill: TONIGHT, WE'RE ASKING
ONLINE: IS IT EVEN POSSIBLE TO
GUARANTEE A JOB FOR EVERY
AMERICAN?
KWAME HOLMAN HAS MORE.
>> Holman: DUKE ECONOMIST
WILLIAM DARITY SAYS THERE IS A
SOLUTION TO PERSISTENT
UNEMPLOYMENT-- A FEDERALLY
FUNDED PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYMENT
PROGRAM.
READ HOW THAT WOULD WORK IN
DARITY'S GUEST ESSAY IN MAKING
SENSE.
AND ON SCIENCE WEDNESDAY,
UNLOCKING THE SECRETS OF THE
JELLYFISH STING.
AND JOIN US TOMORROW FOR TWO
LIVE CHATS: GWEN TEAMS UP WITH
THE "WASHINGTON POST'S" DAN
BALZ.
THEY'LL BE FIELDING QUESTIONS ON
POLITICS AND JOURNALISM.
AND ON TWITTER, WE'LL BE
DISCUSSING THE POPE'S RECENT
COMMENTS ON GAYS.
BOTH CHATS BEGIN AT 1:00 P.M.
EASTERN TIME.
FIND THE DETAILS ARE ON OUR
HOMEPAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
>> Brown: AND AGAIN, TO OUR
HONOR ROLL OF AMERICAN SERVICE
PERSONNEL KILLED IN THE
AFGHANISTAN CONFLICT.
WE ADD THEM AS THEIR DEATHS ARE
MADE OFFICIAL AND PHOTOGRAPHS
BECOME AVAILABLE.
HERE, IN SILENCE, ARE NINE MORE.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, NPR'S DEBORAH AMOS
WILL BRING US THE LATEST FROM
SYRIA.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROWVENI ENG.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
GOOD NIGHT.